\section{Where are we}

\subsection{The concurrency squeeze: from the hardware up, from the web down}

It used to be fashionable in academic papers or think tank reports to
predict and then bemoan the imminent demise of Moore's law, to wax on
about the need to ``go sideways'' in hardware design from the number
of cores per die to the number of processors per box. Those days of
polite conversation about the on-coming storm are definitely in our
rear view mirror. Today's developer knows that if her program is
commercially interesting at all then it needs to be web-accessible on
a 24x7 basis; and if it's going to be commercially significant it will
need to support at least 100's if not thousands of concurrent accesses
to its features and functions. Her application is most likely hosted
by some commercial outfit, a Joyent or an EngineYard or an Amazon EC3
or $\ldots$ who are deploying her code over multiple servers each of
which is in turn multi-processor with multiple cores. This means that
from the hardware up and from the web down today's intrepid developer
is dealing with parallelism, concurrency and distribution.

Unfortunately, the methods available in in mainstream programming
languages of dealing with these different aspects of simultaneous
execution are not up to the task of supporting development at this
scale. The core issue is complexity. The modern application developer
is faced with a huge range of concurrency and concurrency control
models, from transactions in the database to message-passing between
server components. Whether to partition her data is no longer an
option, she's thinking hard about \emph{how} to partition her data and
whether or not this ``eventual consistency'' thing is going to
liberate her or bring on a new host of programming nightmares. By
comparison threads packages seem like quaint relics from a time when
concurrent programming was a little hobby project she did after
hours. The modern programmer needs to simplify her life in order to
maintain a competitive level of productivity.

Functional programming provides a sort of transition technology. On
the one hand, it's not that much of a radical departure from
mainstream programming like Java. On the other it offers simple,
uniform model that introduces a number of key features that
considerably improve productivity and maintainability. Java brought
the C/C++ programmer several steps closer to a functional paradigm,
introducing garbage collection, type abstractions such as generics and
other niceties. Languages like \texttt{OCaml}, \texttt{F\#} and
\texttt{Scala} go a step further, bringing the modern developer into
contact with higher order functions, the relationship between types
and pattern matching and powerful abstractions like monads. Yet,
functional programming does not embrace concurrency and distribution
in its foundations. It is not based on a model of computation, like
the actor model or the process calculi, in which the notion of
execution is fundamentally concurrent. That said, it meshes
nicely with a variety of concurrency programming models. In
particular, the combination of higher order functions (with the
ability to pass functions as arguments and return functions as values)
together with the structuring techniques of monads make models such as
software transactional memory or data flow parallelism quite easy to
integrate, while pattern-matching additionally makes message-passing
style easier to incorporate.

\subsection{Ubiquity of robust, high-performance virtual machines}

Another reality of the modern programmer's life is the ubiquity of
robust, high-performance virtual machines. Both the \texttt{Java}
Virtual Machine (\texttt{JVM}) and the Common Language Runtime
(\texttt{CLR}) provide managed code execution environments that are
not just competitive with their unmanaged counterparts (such as
\texttt{C} and \texttt{C++}), but are actually the dominant choice for
many applications. This has two effects that are playing themselves
out in terms of industry trends. Firstly, it provides some level of
insulation between changes in hardware design (from single core per
die to multi-core, for example) that impacts execution model and
language level interface. To illustrate the point, note that these
changes in hardware have impacted hardware memory models. This has a
much greater impact on the \texttt{C/C++} family of languages than on
\texttt{Java} because the latter is built on an abstract machine that
not only hides the underlying hardware memory model, but more
importantly can hide changes to the model. One may, in fact,
contemplate an ironic future in which this abstraction alone causes
managed code to outperform \texttt{C/C++} code because of
\texttt{C/C++}'s faulty assumptions about best use of memory that
percolate all through application code. Secondly, it completely
changes the landscape for language development. By providing a much
higher level and more uniform target for language execution semantics
it lowers the barrier to entry for contending language designs. It is
not surprising, therefore, that we have seen an explosion in language
proposals in the last several years, including \texttt{Clojure},
\texttt{Fortress}, \texttt{Scala}, \texttt{F\#} and many others. It
should not escape notice that all of the languages in that list are
either functional languages or object-functional languages, and the
majority of the proposals coming out are either functional,
object-functional or heavily influenced by functional language design
concepts.

\subsection{Advances in functional programming, monads and the awkward squad}

Perhaps chief among the reasons for the popularity of developing a
language design based on functional concepts is that the core of the
functional model is inherently simple. The rules governing the
execution of functional programs (the basis of an abstract evaluator)
can be stated in half a page. In some sense functional language design
is a ``path of least resistance'' approach. A deeper reason for
adoption of functional language design is that the core model is
\emph{compositional}. Enrichment of the execution semantics amounts to
enrichment of the components of the semantics. Much more can be said
about this, but needs to be deferred to a point where more context has
been developed. Deep simplicity and compositionality are properties
and principles that take quite some time to appreciate while some of
the practical reasons that recent language design proposals have been
so heavily influenced by functional language design principles are
easily understood by even the most impatient and pragmatic of
programmers: functional language design has made significant and
demonstrable progress addressing performance issues that plagued it at
the beginning. Moreover, these developments have significant
applicability to the situation related to concurrent execution that
the modern programmer finds herself now.

Since the mid '80's when \texttt{Lisp} and it's progeny were thrown
out of the industry for performance failures a lot of excellent work
has gone on that has rectified many of the problems those languages
faced. In particular, while \texttt{Lisp} implementations tried to
take a practical approach to certain aspects of computation, chiefly
having to do with side-effecting operations and I/O, the underlying
semantic model did not seem well-suited to address those kinds of
computations. And yet, not only are side-effecting computations and
especially I/O ubiquitous, using them led (at least initially) to
considerably better performance. Avoiding those operations (sometimes
called functional purity) seemed to be an academic exercise not well
suited to writing ``real world'' applications.

However, while many industry shops were throwing out functional
languages, except for niche applications, work was going on that would
reverse this trend. One of the key developments in this was an early
bifurcation of functional language designs at a fairly fundamental
level. The \texttt{Lisp} family of languages is untyped and
dynamic. In the modern world the lack of typing might seem egregiously
unmaintainable, but by comparison to \texttt{C} it was more than made
up for by the kind of dynamic meta-programming that these languages
made possible. Programmers enjoyed a certain kind of productivity
because they could ``go meta'' -- writing programs to write programs
(even dynamically modify them on the fly) -- in a uniform manner. This
sort of feature has become mainstream, as found in \texttt{Ruby} or
even \texttt{Java}'s reflection API, precisely because it is so
extremely useful. Unfortunately, the productivity gains of
meta-programming available in \texttt{Lisp} and it's derivatives were
not enough to offset the performance shortfalls at the time.

There was, however, a statically typed branch of functional
programming that began to have traction in certain academic circles
with the development of the \texttt{ML} family of languages -- which
today includes \texttt{OCaml}, the language that can be considered the
direct ancestor of both \texttt{Scala} and \texttt{F\#}. One of the
very first developments in that line of investigation was the
recognition that data description came in not just one but \emph{two}
flavors: types and \emph{patterns}. The two flavors, it was
recognized, are dual. Types tell the program how data is built up
from its components while patterns tell a program how to take data
apart in terms of its components. The crucial point is that these two
notions are just two sides of the same coin and can be made to work
together and support each other in the structuring and execution of
programs. In this sense the development -- while an enrichment of the
language features -- is a reduction in the complexity of
concepts. Both language designer and programmer think in terms of one
thing, description of data, while recognizing that such descriptions
have uses for structuring and de-structuring data. These are the
origins of elements in \texttt{Scala}'s design like
\lstinline[language=Scala]!case class!es and the
\lstinline[language=Scala]!match! construct.

The \texttt{ML} family of languages also gave us the first robust
instantiations of parametric polymorphism. The widespread adoption of
generics in \texttt{C/C++}, \texttt{Java} and \texttt{C\#} say much
more about the importance of this feature than any impoverished
account the author can conjure here. Again, though, the moral of the
story is that this represents a significant reduction in
complexity. Common container patterns, for example, can be separated
from the types they contain, allowing for programming that is
considerably DRYer. \footnote{ DRY is the pop culture term for the 'Do
  not Repeat Yourself'. Don't make me say it again. }

Still these languages suffered when it came to a compelling and
uniform treatment of side-effecting computations. That all changed
with Haskell. In the mid-80's a young researcher by the name of
Eugenio Moggi observed that an idea previously discovered in a then
obscure branch of mathematics (called category theory) offered a way
to \emph{structure} functional programs to allow them to deal with
side-effecting computations in uniform and compelling
manner. Essentially, the notion of a \emph{monad} (as it was called in
the category theory literature) provided a language level abstraction
for structuring side-effecting computations in a functional
setting. In today's parlance, he found a domain specific language, a
DSL, for organizing side-effecting computations in an ambient (or
hosting) functional language. Once Moggi made this discovery another
researcher, Phil Wadler, realized that this DSL had a couple of
different ``presentations'' (different concrete syntaxes for the same
underlying abstract syntax) that were almost immediately
understandable by the average programmer. One presentation, called
comprehensions (after it's counter part in set theory), could be
understood directly in terms of a very familiar construct
\lstinline[language=SQL]!SELECT ... FROM ... WHERE ...!; while the
other, dubbed \lstinline[language=Haskell]!do!-notation by the
\texttt{Haskell} community, provided operations that behaved
remarkably like sequencing and assignment. \texttt{Haskell} offers
syntactic sugar to support the latter while the former has been
adopted in both \texttt{XQuery}'s
\lstinline[language=XML]!FLWOR!-expressions and Microsoft's
\texttt{LINQ}.

Of course, to say that \texttt{Haskell} offers syntactic sugar hides
the true nature of how monads are supported in the language. There are
actually three elements that come together to make this work. First,
expressing the pattern at all requires support for parametric
polymorphism, generics-style type abstraction. Second, another
mechanism, \texttt{Haskell}'s \lstinline[language=Haskell]!typeclass!
mechanism (the \texttt{Haskell} equivalent to \texttt{Scala}'s
\lstinline[language=Scala]!trait!) is required to make the pattern
itself polymorphic. Then there is the
\lstinline[language=Haskell]!do!-notation itself and the syntax-driven
translation from that to \texttt{Haskell}'s core syntax. Taken
together, these features allow the compiler to work out which
interpretations of sequencing, assignment and return are in play --
without type annotations. The simplicity of the design sometimes makes
it difficult to appreciate the subtlety, or the impact it has had on
modern language design, but this was the blueprint for the way
\texttt{Scala}'s \lstinline[language=Scala]!for!-comprehensions work.

With this structuring technique (and others like it) in hand it
becomes a lot easier to spot (often by type analysis alone) situations
where programs can be rewritten to equivalent programs that execute
much better on existing hardware. This is one of the central benefits
of the monad abstraction, and these sorts of powerful abstractions are
among the primary reasons why functional programming has made such
progress in the area of performance. As an example, not only can
\texttt{LINQ}-based expressions be retargeted to different
storage models (from relational database to \texttt{XML} database)
they can be rewritten to execute in a data parallel fashion. Results
of this type suggest that we are really just at the beginning of
understanding the kinds of performance optimizations available through
the use of monadic programming structuring techniques.

It turns out that side-effecting computations are right at the nub of
strategies for using concurrency as a means to scale up performance
and availability. In some sense a side-effect really represents an
interaction between two systems (one of which is viewed as ``on the
side'' of the other, i.e. at the boundary of some central locus of
computation). Such an interaction, say between a program in memory and
the I/O subsystem, entails some sort of
synchronization. Synchronization constraints are the central concerns
in using concurrency to scale up both performance and
availability. Analogies to traffic illustrate the point. It's easy to
see the difference in traffic flow if two major thoroughfares can run
side-by-side versus when they intersect and have to use some
synchronization mechanism like a traffic light or a stop sign. So, in
a concurrent world, functional purity -- which insists on no
side-effects, i.e. no synchronization -- is no longer an academic
exercise with unrealistic performance characteristics. Instead
computation which can proceed without synchronization, including
side-effect-free code, becomes the gold standard. Of course, it is not
realistic to expect computation never to synchronize, but now this is
seen in a different light, and is perhaps the most stark way to
illustrate the promise of monadic structuring techniques in the
concurrent world programmers find themselves. They allow us to write
in a language that is at least notionally familiar to most programmers
and yet analyze what's written and retarget it for the concurrent
setting.

In summary, functional language design improved in terms of 

\begin{itemize}
  \item extending the underlying mechanism at work in how types work on
  data exposing the duality between type conformance and
  pattern-matching
  \item extending the reach of types to parametric polymorphism
  \item providing a framework for cleaning up the semantics of
    side-effecting or stateful computations and generalizing them
\end{itemize}

Taken together with the inherent simplicity of functional language
design and its compositional nature we have the makings of a
revolution in complexity management. This is the real dominating trend
in the industry. Once \texttt{Java} was within 1.4X the speed of
\texttt{C/C++} the game was over because \texttt{Java} offered such a
significant reduction in application development complexity which
turned into gains in both productivity and manageability. Likewise,
the complexity of \texttt{Java} \footnote{and here we are not picking
  on \texttt{Java}, specifically, the same could be said of
  \texttt{C\#}} development and especially \texttt{Java} development
on Internet-based applications has become nearly
prohibitive. Functional languages, especially languages like
\texttt{Scala} which run on the \texttt{JVM} and have excellent
interoperability with the extensive \texttt{Java} legacy, and have
performance on par with \texttt{Java} are poised to do to
\texttt{Java} what \texttt{Java} did to \texttt{C/C++}.
