\section{Where are we going}

With a preamble like that it doesn't take much to guess where all this
is heading. More and more we are looking at trends that lead toward
more functional and functionally-based web applications. We need not
look to the growing popularity of cutting-edge frameworks like
\texttt{Lift} to see this trend. Both Javascript (with it's origins in
Self) and Rails must be counted amongst the functionally influenced.

\subsection{A functional web}

Because there are already plenty of excellent functional web
frameworks in the open source community our aim is not to build
another. Rather our aim is to supply a set of design patterns that
will work with most -- in fact are already implicitly at work in many
-- but that when used correctly will reduce complexity.

Specifically, we will look at the organization of the pipeline of a
web-application from the pipeline of HTTP requests through the
application logic to the store and back. We will see how in each case
judicious use of the monadic design pattern provides for significant
leverage in structuring code, making it both simpler, more
maintainable and more robust in the face of change.

To that end we will be looking at

\begin{itemize}
  \item processing HTTP-streams using presence of \emph{delimited}
  continuations to allow for a sophisticated state management
  \item parser combinators for parsing HTTP-requests and higher-level
    application protocols using HTTP as a transport
  \item application domain model as an abstract syntax
  \item zippers as a means of automatically generating navigation
  \item collections and containers in memory
  \item storage, including a new way to approach query and search
\end{itemize}

In each case there is an underlying organization to the computation
that solves the problem. In each case we find an instance of the
monadic design pattern. Whether this apparent universal applicability
is an instance of finding a hammer that turns everything it encounters
into nails or that structuring computation in terms of monads has a
genuine depth remains to be seen. What can be said even at this early
stage of the game is that object-oriented design patterns were
certainly proposed for each of these situations and many others. It
was commonly held that such techniques were not merely universally
applicable, but of genuine utility in every domain of application. The
failure of object-oriented design methods to make good on these claims
might be an argument for caution. Sober assessment of the situation,
however, gives cause for hope.

Unlike the notion monad, objects began as ``folk'' tradition. It was
many years into proposals for object-oriented design methods before
there were commonly accepted formal or mathematical accounts. By
contrast monads began as a mathematical entity. Sequestered away in
category theory the idea was one of a whole zoology of generalizations
of common mathematical entities. It took some time to understand that
both set comprehensions and algebraic data types were instances monads
and that the former was a universal language for the notion. It took
even more time to see the application to structuring
computations. Progress was slow and steady and built from a solid
foundation. This gave the notion an unprecedented level of quality
assurance testing. The category theoretic definition is nearly fifty
years old. If we include the investigation of set comprehensions as a
part of the QA process we add another one hundred years. If we include
the forty years of vigorous use of relational databases and the
\lstinline[language=SQL]!SELECT-FROM-WHERE! construct in the industry,
we see that this was hardly just an academic exercise.

Perhaps more importantly than any of those is the fact that while
object-oriented techniques \emph{as realized in mainstream language
  designs} \footnote{To be clear, message-passing and delegation are
  certainly compositional. Very few mainstream languages support these
  concepts directly} ultimately failed to be compositional in any
useful way -- inheritance, in fact, being positively at odds with
concurrent composition -- the notion of monad is actually an attempt
to capture the meaning of composition. As we will see in the upcoming
sections, it defines an powerful notion of parametric
composition. This is crucial because in the real world
\emph{composition is the primary means to scaling} -- both in the
sense of performance and in the sense of complexity. As pragmatic
engineers we manage complexity of scale by building larger systems out
of smaller ones. As pragmatic engineers we understand that each time
components are required to interface or synchronize we have the
potential for introducing performance concerns. The parametric form of
composition encapsulated in the notion of monad gives us a language
for talking about both kinds of scaling and connecting the two
ideas. It provides a language for talking about the interplay between
the composition of structure and the composition of the flow of
control. It encapsulates stateful computation. It encapsulates data
structure. In this sense the notion of monad is poised to be the
rational reconstruction of the notion of object. Telling this story
was my motivation for writing this book.

\subsection{DSL-based design}

It has become buzz-word du jour to talk about DSL-based design. So
much so that it's becoming hard to understand what the term means. In
the functional setting the meaning is really quite clear and since the
writing of the Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs (one
of the seminal texts of functional programming and one of the first to
pioneer the idea of DSL-based design) the meaning has gotten
considerably clearer. In a typed functional setting the design of a
collection of types tailor-made to model and address the operations of
some domain is the basis and effectively the design of an abstract
syntax of a language for computing over the domain.

To see why this must be so, let's begin from the basics. Informally,
DSL-based design means we express our design in terms of a little
mini-language, tailor-made for our application domain. When push
comes to shove, though, if we want to know what DSL-based design means
in practical terms, eventually we have to ask what goes into the
specification of a language. The commonly received wisdom is that a
language is comprised of a \emph{syntax} and a \emph{semantics}. The
syntax carries the structure of the expressions of the language while
the semantics says how to evaluate those expressions to achieve a
result -- typically either to derive a meaning for the expression
(such as this expression denotes that value) or to perform an action or
computation indicated by the expression (such as print this string on
the console). Focusing, for the moment, on syntax as the more concrete
of the two elements, we note that syntax is governed by
\emph{grammar}. Whether we're building a concrete syntax, like the
\texttt{ASCII} strings one types to communicate \texttt{Scala}
expressions to the compiler or building an abstract syntax, like the
expression trees of \texttt{LINQ}, syntax is governed by grammar.

What we really want to call out in this discussion is that a
collection of types forming a model of some domain is actually a
grammar for an abstract syntax. This is most readily seen by comparing
the core of the type definition language of modern functional
languages with something like \texttt{EBNF}, the most prevalent
language for defining context-free grammars. At their heart the two
structures are nearly the same. When one is defining a grammar one is
defining a collection of types that model some domain and vice
versa. This is blindingly obvious in \texttt{Haskell}, and is the
essence of techniques like the application of two-level type
decomposition to model grammars. Moreover, while a little harder to
see in \texttt{Scala} it is still there. It is in this sense that
typed functional languages like \texttt{Scala} are very well suited
for DSL-based design. To the extent that the use of \texttt{Scala}
relies on the functional core of the language (not the object-oriented
bits) virtually every domain model is already a kind of DSL in that
it's types define a kind of abstract syntax.

Taking this idea a step further, in most cases such collections of
types are actually representable as a monad. Monads effectively
encapsulate the notion of an algebra -- which in this context is a
category theorist's way of saying a certain kind of collection of
types. If you are at all familiar with parser combinators and perhaps
have heard that these too are facilitated with monadic composition
then the suggestion that there is a deeper link between parsing,
grammars, types and monads might make some sense. On the other hand,
if this seems a little too abstract it will be made much more concrete
in the following sections. For now, we are simply planting the seed of
the idea that monads are not just for structuring side-effecting
computations.
